Hey friends backlog is an
all-in-one project and code management
tool development teams have been
waiting for with project management
bug tracking Wiki's and get
rolled into one easy to
use platform backlog provides. The
powerful features at development teams
need under a clean UI
that anyone can use you
can easily on board your
whole team and start working
on tasks in minutes additional
features like Gant and burden
down charts. Make it easy
to manage projects. Apps keep
your team connected and simple
pricing scales with you, so
you can stop worrying about
per user charges build your
next project with backlog get
a 30-day obligation free trial
at backlog.com Hansel minutes. That's
ba CK L OG.com Hansel
minutes. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. Today. I'm
talking with Clyde w4d at
the author of think black
is a fantastic book and
he's been running all over
the country talking about it.
And now he's going to
talk to us today. I'm
looking at an amazing picture
here, sir with is a
picture of your dad on
the steps of IBM with
what looks like about 20
middle-aged white folks to women
and your dad's in the
back. They're kind of like
giving us the the Died
through history. What's going on
here? Yeah. This was a
picture Scott. And first thanks
to thank you for inviting
me on this podcast. This
was a picture of my
dad taken in the early
1950s. Not long after he
became the first black software
engineer hired by IBM was
actually hired by IBM in
1946 went to work at
1947 for the company and
worked there for 37 years
what I found particularly interesting
about this picture. And didn't
really get to it until
it had been published in
the book is to look
at where the eyes of
everybody are looking if you
see that my dad and
the women are all looking
away and all of the
other men in the picture
are looking directly at the
camera almost as if to
say, I belong while my
dad and the women are
kind of questioning whether they
do belong in that frame.
Yeah. It isn't it is
an interesting awkward thing like,
you know, you don't know
what to read into and
what not to read into
when you look at a
photograph like this. Why are
people position where they are
you know your dad in
the women are all kind
of together within a foot
of each other your dad's
in the back? Maybe it's
by height. Maybe it's maybe
it's raised. Who knows but
there is a certain sense
of like here's all these
people that work at IBM
and then also these two
other people that are being
effectively other dude. Yeah, and
you don't know you're absolutely
right. And I think that
questioning is exactly what this
book was all about for
me trying to better understand
the times when my dad
was hired at the company
and what that meant for
him as a black man
what that meant for me
as his son who later
went to work for the
company. Yeah, trying to understand
what these things are when
we're living in 2020. It's
an exercise in in historical
empathy. You know we go
and we see movies like
hidden figures and we think
what it must be like,
but we only spend two
hours watching a movie like
that. We see one or
two awkward things where you
know, Taraji Henson and hidden
figures is asked to get
some coffee and she has
to assert her her right
to be there. And then
you say oh, wow that
was awful and then you
leave the movie and then
it's over but he spent
30 how many years their
37 years 37 years. Like
was it like that? 365
Days out in the dick
was there ever a safe
space was ever a moment
in you know, how many
years 10 20 years do
you get to go in
and feel like you belong?
Yeah, and I think that's
a great question. And I
think the answer is yes,
there were obviously times when
the Prejudice that he did
face wasn't right in his
face. And so there was
that opportunity to relax or
at least feel comfortable and
what he was doing. Look
my dad did things like
he was he actually maintained
the data division of the
first ever COBOL compiler and
I can remember times when
he was quite proud of
doing something like that. He
took me down for example
to do memory checks on
an IBM 708 and boy
and those days, you know
here you have to K
of memory Opera occupying a
half a city block and
a memory check took all
weekend. Whereas now we do
a memory check of a
gig in less than a
couple of milliseconds. So there
were times when I think
my dad was relaxed enjoyed
what he did recognize He
was doing was being important,
but there are also times
when he really had to
fight to maintain his position
and to try to make
some inroads into change at
a company which like many
companies of the day were
resistant to the diversity and
inclusion that they even said
they were all about. What
were the qualifications? How are
this even start? Like, I
have a pretty good idea
of how I would get
my son's into software or
Hardware today. It would probably
we start with an undergraduate
degree of some kind depending
on whether they were interested
in going beyond that. So
there's a barrier there but
also just natural inclination, but
I'm trying to imagine in
the in the in the
40s as he is growing
up and preparing himself. Did
he have a natural mind
for for the logic of
the time of computers or
was it math? What was
the thing that he had
that let him? Yeah. And
yeah, and that's again a
great question back in the
early in the middle. Ortiz
late 40s, even when I
was hired at IBM, you
know, you couldn't go and
get a computer science degree.
So the question is, how
did you prepare? I don't
think my dad prepared for
a career in computers that
wasn't even on the table
is in his mind. He
prepared for a career in
accounting computers at the dawn
of the digital age were
basically split into two tracks
one was a scientific track
and the other was a
commercial business. Bonus track the
commercial and business track really
focused on early computers taking
over the accounting functions of
the business. So consequently if
you were looking for somebody
to work with the early
computers you were looking for
somebody who is really good
at business and in particular
at accounting. That's what my
dad went to school for
at city college in New
York. And that's where Watson
found him. Ah, so when
we say Watson found him
Thomas Watson from IBM found
your dad. Absolutely Watson and
my dad actually met Watson
because his accounting professor invited
him by her house for
dinner. I believe and what
my dad said many times
was he walked into her
apartment and was surprised by
Thomas Watson stepping out and
offering him a job, but
saying very clearly to my
dad. Look, I'm the only
person in this company who
could offer you this job.
Wow. Oh, so would it
be fair to say that
Thomas Watson flexed and kind
of offered his lended lent
his privilege to make that
happen. Yeah, I think my
dad had that sense whether
Watson was doing it because
he knew he was conveying
that privilege to my dad
or whether there was an
ulterior motive behind it that
I really question and write
about in the book. But
as far as my dad
was concerned Watson was acting
as his hero or his
champion and I think for
many years my dad felt
there was some protection gained
from them I've talked about
This with my mentorship groups
where we feel that the
term mentorship goes beyond when
it becomes sponsorship and that
for for real for real
change and for real opportunities
to happen. It's great to
have a mentor but have
a sponsor is someone to
bring you into a room
and then let you shine
once you're in that room.
Yeah, now again whether Watson
really was my dad sponsor
or was a very Savvy
businessman who understood the public
relations value of hiring African-Americans
and Jews shortly after World
War II that I question
but there's no question about
it that it was Watson's
word that allowed my dad
to get hired at a
time when blacks really weren't
hired into Technology field. My
dad was the second I
can American hired by IBM
the first as a software
or systems engineer as they
called them in those days
and the other gentleman was
a salesperson, right? That's right.
That was TJ Laster who
was hired as just a
couple of months before my
dad as a Salesman and
you make the assertion. I've
heard you make this assertion
that your dad is or
maybe the first black software
engineer in America at the
time given, of course that
it's hard to decide. What
was the software person when
the titles really didn't exist.
Yeah, and and I know
again it's an interesting question
and it is an assertion
I make the truth of
the matter is Scott is
saying that my dad was
a software engineer in 1949
is somewhat of an anachronism
because there was no software.
Excuse me in 1947 when
he was hired. There was
no software then. My dad
was hired to work on
IBM's first programmable computers for
which there was no software.
Yes, there were card readers,
but you didn't write a
program on. Cards cards are
only used for data in
those early days of computing
my dad. However worked on
machines like the 407 which
again was IBM's first commercially
available programmable computer eventually that
Hardware gave rise to software.
And as I said earlier,
my dad was right there
at the beginning of that
process doing things like maintaining
the data division of the
first COBOL compiler. So in
that regard, my dad was
the first African American involvement.
Evolved in software within IBM
and so I think it's
a fair bet to say
he was the first black
software engineer in America. That's
fantastic. One of the things
that is overwhelming to me
as I try to look
past look into history is
how are these in the
forgive me of this is
a dumb question. But how
are these computers even useful
like an IBM, you know,
705 had a disk drive
with 60k of data on
a drive. What would you
even do with that? Yeah,
and it's and so 407
Diva did. Been have a
disk drive all it had
was car a card reader
at a typewriter head and
a drawer which you literally
used a patch cord to
control how the circuitry work.
And basically I mean one
of the things on the
commercial side they used at
for was accounting your straight
accounting that 407 could add
numbers and print out results
faster than a human could
and with more accuracy as
well to one of the
first uses of this type.
Type of what used to
call unit record or card
reading punched card equipment really
was for counting people and
the senses and that's really
how the digital Revolution started
at the turn of the
century. So the idea of
counting anything you could count
tabulate sort control. That's what
the early computers did and
that's really what their base
is was in the commercial
field now in the scientific
field those early computers, there
were two principal uses one
was in Believe it or
not early weather prediction and
the other was in in
the military with anything those
early computers could do for
example to compute bomb trajectories
or missile trajectories things like
that. My dad didn't work
on that side of the
business. My dad worked on
the commercial end and just
for folks who are listening
really closely to understand the
scope of this 705 with
20 K of memory has
won five hundred thousandths the
memory capacity of an eight
gigabytes. Art phone and an
8 gigabyte smartphone or typical
smartphone is almost 2 2
million times faster than what
was the top-of-the-line computer at
the time correct? We've had
is corrected and just to
add to that Scott a
705 with all the attended
disk drives and tape drives
and and tabulators and sorters
you could get a computer
room that was probably on
the order of 10 tons
or more compare that to
your cell phone. That's you
know, not even 10 ounces
and you get Sense of
the size and change that's
happened over the past couple
of decades. Yeah, it's just
it's so important. I feel
like Computer Science History isn't
taught enough. I hope that
your book ends up being
taught in schools because I
feel like there's such a
an assumption as my as
my eleven-year-old picks up a
pocket supercomputer and puts it
in his back pocket and
wanders off to play Angry
Birds. The idea that we
are standing on the shoulders
of giants is just it
isn't even a big enough
phrase to express how much
power we have in Computing
compared to what we did
back in the day. Yes,
and I think that's one
of the things also my
dad and his IBM colleagues
recognized is how tremendous what
they were doing would be
for the future. I think
where they may have not
understand what they were doing
for the future is how
well they were also unleashing
a technological monster that in
the wrong hands could be
used in ways that they
might not have even predicted.
Well and you Out that
the one of the first
uses was the census and
Counting people and you might
we might be listening to
this podcast and thinking what
counting people that's it's a
pretty straightforward and stay had
kind of a thing to
do but one of the
first uses of computers has
in itself embedded questions of
ethics and you know, software
itself being a political entity
counting people sounds harmless, but
it depends on how you
go about it. Absolutely and
so So one of IBM's
first ever large-scale projects was
counting people for the Eugenics
record office run out of
Cold Springs Harbor New York
who are engaged in a
project to count people and
to discriminate people. They were
counting on the island of
Jamaica. So they could separate
out mixed-raced individuals from Pure
Europeans for forced sterilization and
other means of Population control
IBM software. Well, it wasn't
sore for then IBM Hardware
in the form of Punch
Cards and punched cards equipment
was used to really make
that Jamaica study a success
and that began a process
Scott where IBM and its
hardware and other unit record
punch card equipment was used
for example in Nazi Germany
later in South Africa. And
so so you do get
the sense that just because
you can count people that
always isn't necessarily a good
thing depending on who's doing
the counting and trying to
make the discrimination and unfortunately,
IBM's equipment was involved in
some of the worst uses
of counting people that we
can imagine in the 20th
century. Does your dashboard design
engage users and set your
product apart according to the
analyst firm Gartner the look
and feel of embedded analytics
as a direct impact on
how end users perceive your
application? Fortunately. You don't need
to be a professional designer
to turn flat information into
a rich visualizations logy analytics
has compiled 17 design tips
that will transform your dashboards
Loggia analytics is the leading
development platform for embedded dashboards
and reports and unlike other
Solutions. Logic gives you complete
control to create your own
unique analytics experience visit La
G analytics. That's a low
GI analytics.com Hansel minutes to
access 17 easy changes that
will transform your dashboards that
sell ogi analytics.com Hansel minutes.
It brings up very very
difficult ethical questions today because
we are talking about facial
recognition if I go and
do something as simple as
making a Open source blog
and put it out there
and it turns into the
most popular blog to be
spreading hate then, you know
one person might say well,
hey free software. This is
the whole point. I can't
control, you know, what direct
here's a gun. I can't
control what direction someone points
it but it's interesting that
even the very very first
computer programs out. There can
be used for good or
used for evil. Just as
I suppose a brick could
be as well. Yes, and
I think that's important, you
know, we talked earlier about
how in Computers we don't
have always that sense of
History. It's not just in
terms of these wonderful technological
developments. We don't have that
history. We don't have that
history of how this wonderful
technology was used. And so
consequently, I see time and
time again people who don't
understand that history recreating some
of the very ethical challenges
that computers begin with back
in the 20s and through
the 30s and 40s and
50s as I said in
Eugenics the Holocaust and apartheid
I'll just give you one
simple example and really you
just pick up the newspaper
and you see it every
day. There was a an
educational game on on slavery
supposedly released several years ago
called slave Tetris and part
of this game was you
drop slaves into the hold
of a slave ship and
you move them back and
forth to try to pack
them tightly now. I don't
know who in their right
mind would Lisa game like
that, but it was released
and the people who released
it thought they were doing
something positive. Well, there was
a huge outcry obviously and
eventually that game was pulled
but it's ideas like this
where you fail to understand
how technology is actually applying
itself to various groups. I
think it's really important to
kind of understand the history
of where this technology has
been used and sometimes not
for the best uses. Andy
died. It's important for us
to understand his storable context
when we do something as
small as write a little
piece of software. Yeah, and
I'll just give you another
example just a couple of
days ago. I was reading
about Google's attempt to improve
its facial recognition software by
taking small video cameras on
you know, smartphones into homeless
shelters singling out black men
because as we know there's
been a problem with how
facial recognition software deals with
people of dark skin. But
Google didn't tell these men
what they were using these
video recordings for often didn't
even tell them they were
making video recordings. And then
we're trying to use that
to improve their facial recognition
software, you know, that is
another example of how a
company might even be well-meaning
but doesn't understand the historical
context of how technology has
been used against civil and
human rights and now committing
an act which I think
any rational person sitting down
talking to them would say
wait a minute. There's got
to be a better way
to do this. You're not
going about it the right
way right in that example
where the the larger goal
make facial recognition and make
whether it be Google photos
or whatever. They're working on
work better for people with
dark skin, certainly laudable and
correct goal at then all
the way down to the
leaf nodes having the street
team which were being paid
$5 a head to just
Hunt down folks and take
their picture without letting them
know totally a perversion of
the ultimate correct goal. Absolutely
and again historically that goes
back for example to right
after 9/11 when IBM attempting
to improve its Watson facial
recognition technology used video recordings
from the New York City
Police Department without the knowledge
of the individuals. They were
using those recordings in an
attempt to get there. So,
Software to better discriminate based
on race and that goes
back to the use of
software to discriminate based on
race. For example in South
Africa, which goes back to
the use of hardware and
punch cards to discriminate based
on race in Nazi Germany,
which goes back right to
Eugenics. So I think my
point is is that we
need to understand the line
and the history of the
line that we can draw
between the earliest somewhat. Verdant
uses of software and today
so that those of us
involved in this industry can
make sure that things like
this don't happen. I want
to shift a little bit
to talk about what you
what you start talking about
in chapter 10, which is
when WWE B Du Bois
talks about the concept of
double Consciousness yet, which also
could be applied to modern-day
code-switching which is the idea
of being of two minds
of two places. Not knowing
where you belong. You know,
your father is is black
at home with his family.
Is he also black only
when he's at work? What
is his position at work?
How does he move between
these these spaces? Yeah. And
again, it's a great point
to bring up and I
think one of the challenges
of what it means or
what it meant to my
father to be the first
black software engineer at IBM
in America. Was this tremendous
pressure on the outside that
he was quote somehow representing
his race. I heard that
phrase so many times growing
up. I can't tell you
and it was both an
honor and an incredible burden
because my dad felt that
somehow everything. He did would
be looked out under a
microscope of the fact that
he had dark skin and
as he began to realise
that That he wasn't going
to get promotions he deserved
maybe he wasn't going to
would be seeking to be
forced actually to train people
who would later become his
supervisors instead of looking to
the outside world and saying
hey, there's something nitrite not
right here. My dad often
turned that view inside and
said, I guess what's happening
to me is because I'm
black and there was this
almost self loathing of his
skin color as a human
being that he Begin to
develop. He started to read
books about author Murray and
that whole movement of intelligence
and race and even though
those books were debunked. He
still believed it that somehow
this helped him better understand
what was happening to him,
you know, the boys talked
about this is double Consciousness.
We talked about it as
internalized racism code-switching. There are
a number of different ways
to look at this but
the fundamental underlying issue here.
Is that as an African-American
my dad was turning the
racism he experienced in the
outside world inside and thinking
that he was the problem
even though he was an
incredibly intelligent man on the
IBM Championship chess teams for
a number of years played
for instruments was an operatic
baritone was working in this
incredible field in high-tech still
that basic idea that he
was less competent less capable
less intelligent because of his
skin. Color crept into who
he was and became an
issue that really was quite
a challenge for me to
bridge with him and became
a source of conflict between
us. So when we talk
about imposter syndrome, and if
you apply what we think
about is technology impostor syndrome
to that the two two
voices concept of double Consciousness,
you are always questioning yourself
and trying to find your
own Center as you as
you navigate spaces. Absolutely and
I think Certainly, my dad
as an African-American understood this
women in high-tech understand this
as well and many people
who have this sense of
do they belong and are
constantly trying to do something
to themselves to justify either
belonging or what's happening to
them. It's got we stalked
it early at the beginning
of this podcast about that
picture that picture of my
dad and the women there
and I think in some
which specs that picture is
a great example of what
we're talking about right now.
Now that sense of the
Imposter send them do I
belong or do I don't
do I not belong you
can look at the eyes
of those folks and you
can see those who think
yeah, I really belong and
those who are questioning that
let me ask a hard
question that I think this
if someone's made it this
far into the podcast they
might be thinking why does
it always have to be
about color? Why can't we
quote unquote just do our
jobs? Why is that kind
of a dangerous bit of
dismissiveness or is it It
yeah, I mean and that's
obviously a great question. I
think it's a question that
certainly comes up today more
so than it did in
my dad's era and I
was writing this book about
my dad's error. It would
be great if we could
be a colorblind Society, but
we're not there. We're certainly
not opposed to racial Society
even though a lot of
people thought when we elected
a black president, that would
be the case. The truth
of the matter is when
you're doing your job and
just doing your job. But
you're not getting the promotion's
you receive your that you
should receive your having to
train people who later become
those who manage you when
you look at the diversity
or lack of diversity around
you when you look at
software and high-tech products released
that don't address the needs
of everybody particularly people of
color and minorities. Then you
do have to take into
account race. You do have
to take into account diversity
and inclusion simply looking at
the Alex that the high-tech
industry generates and their disproportionate
negative impact for example on
people of color. You've got
to ask yourself why but
also more importantly Scott. I
think you've got to look
at the steps. You can
take that might change that
that's what I'm really about.
How do we get to
that place where we can
say we're just doing our
jobs knowing that just doing
our jobs means we're going
to take into account ways
that we don't Reduce bias
into the high-tech products that
we develop which is which
is really to say that
we do the goal is
to not be biased and
that starts with an acknowledgement
that everything starts out biased
whether it is intentionally biased
or not. Right? Yeah. I
think the goal is to
be able to in the
high-tech field produced products that
are not biased there are
ways to go about that
but the biggest way not
to go. Oh about that
is just to do nothing
and to just assume that
you're going to generate non
bias code and non-biased products
that is not the case
and we can cite example
after example where the software
created today the algorithms generated
today have bias within them,
you know, in fact because
the developers who are doing
them have their own implicit
bias. All of us have
this implicit bias. The question
is can we become enough
aware of it? So that
Doesn't creep or seep into
the code that we create.
There was a letter that
Thomas Watson son Thomas J
Watson jr. Wrote In 1953
called policy letter for was
that a tell us what
that was and was that
a Savvy move or was
that what he believed? Yeah.
So policy letter number four
is really taken by many
people as an important milestone
in the diversity and inclusion
movement among firms policy letter.
Or was a letter that
I buy that Thomas J
Watson jr. Sent out to
all IBM employees stating IBM's
gold to hire to promote
not on the basis of
race. I think IBM like
any company almost has there's
kind of two ways in
which you can look at
them one. I think that
probably expressed the belief that
Watson want it for his
company, but at the same
time that was happening I
was there watching my There
again not getting the promotion
see what he deserved and
hiring or excuse me training
people that later went on
to become his manager. So
part of that is aspirational
on the part of IBM
and I have to say
that looking at IBM's history
as I do on the
book part of it is
also really Sabe public relations
IBM and Watson both the
old man as we used
to call them and the
sun were really gifted public
relations folks. Oaks and so
I think you've got both
things going on there at
the same time when your
dad was the first the
challenge is not just to
be the first but to
certainly Remain the first and
set up the second third
and 1 mm up for
Success. What were some things
that he did to set
Folks up for Success so
that he was not the
first and last yeah, and
this is one of the
funniest stories. I think I
tell in the book funny
because It has to do
with my dad's dresser drawer
and what I discovered in
an envelope beneath his Playboy
magazines. So beneath his Playboy
magazines. I actually discovered something
I think was more risque
than what was between the
pages of those Playboy magazines.
And that was that my
dad had bootlegged copies of
the IBM entrance examination questions
and answers and he would
share those with Selective selective.
It young mostly black man
that he felt deserved a
leg up and trying to
get into the company. Now.
I think this happened after
the point that my dad
realized. He had hit a
glass ceiling and was not
going to go much further
in the company. So he
was looking around for ways
to help others my dad
also and I've described him
this way and a couple
of times my dad was
a street fighter and a
business suit and I think
he understood that you play
this game in such a
way. That you sometimes have
to use the very tactics
that are used against you
and that's why he I
think ran an underground railroad.
I think that's a good
word to describe it to
bring promising young black men
into the company who might
succeed and go beyond where
he was able to go.
Does that stood that set
them up for success or
does that take a risk
at and when you take
a risk when you refer
someone when I refer someone
to work I'm doing the
best I can to help.
Hopefully set someone up but
if they burn me by
not doing well, then I'm
basically set up the next
person for failure. Absolutely. And
I think the answer to
that question is yes, obviously,
it's a risk, but I
also think my dad was
somewhat Sabi and selective in
who it was that he
tutored or mentored or a
gave this leg up with.
Of course, you have no
way of knowing exactly how
a person is going to
handle themselves, but there was
also So this kind of
code among the first blacks
in many different fields who
understood the eyes of the
world. So to speak or
felt the eyes of the
world were watching them. And
so there was a sense
of let's say a little
more pressure on them to
do well than somebody who
isn't the first or among
the first in a field
so people in this in
this instance who were effectively
the Jesse Owens of software
knew that and felt the
pressure of that. At and
all eyes on them to
succeed absolutely just like Jackie
Robinson and baseball and I
grew up in an area
of the Bronx where there
were many first in different
fields. I would go to
my grandparents house and be
introduced to the first black
fire department lieutenant in the
first black police department Captain
and the first black lawyer
and so there was a
sense in this Williams Bridge
community of the Bronx in
New York that these was
a community of first who
understood Ed that how they
performed would really influence how
those who came after them
had the opportunity to perform.
Well, thank you so much
for chatting with me today,
sir. I do appreciate your
time Scott. This is a
pleasure. I am so happy
to have this opportunity to
talk with you. You can
check out Clyde w4s book
think black a memoir. It's
in hardcover now and you
can also get it on
Kindle. I'll make sure to
include links in the show
notes and hopefully you can
see Clyde speaking locally. As
you continue his tour around
speaking about this this excellent
personal story. Thank you, sir.
Thanks. Again Scott. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes and we'll see you
again next week.